Study Guide 3
Molecular Interactions, Amino Acids, Protein Structure (Lectures 3-5)
At the end of this unit, you should be able to define and/or use the following vocabulary:
Molecular Interactions:

Units: nanometer (nm) = 10-9 m, micron (µm) = 10-6 m, Angstrom (Å) = 10-10 m
reactivity, electrons, octet rule
hydrophobic vs. hydrophilic
Types of molecular interactions:
Covalent bonds (polar and non-polar)
Non-covalent bonds
Ionic bonds
Hydrogen bonds: electronegativity, H-bond donor & acceptor
Van der Waals interaction
Hydrophobic interactions
Functional groups (and classes of compounds): hydroxyl (alcohol), aldehyde (aldehyde), keto (ketone), carboxyl (carboxylic acid), amino (amine), phosphate (organic phosphate), sulfhydryl (thiol), methyl
Types of Macromolecules: Polypeptide (Proteins), Lipids, Nucleic Acids, Polysaccharide (Carbohydrates)
Monomers and polymers
Condensation & hydrolysis reactions
Amino Acids and Protein Structure:

Amino acids: alpha-carbon, amino group, carboxyl group, side chain (R), zwitterion
classes of R-groups: positively charged (basic), negatively charged (acidic), polar, nonpolar
trans configuration, L-isomer
Peptide bond, disulfide bridge
Protein conformation (i.e., 3D shape)
Ramachandran diagram
Levels of protein structure: primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary
Primary structure: peptide bond, sequence of amino acids
Secondary structure: alpha-helix (3.6 amino acids/turn, 1.5 Å/amino acid); beta-strand; beta-sheet (parallel, anti-parallel, mixed; 3.5 Å/amino acid), beta-turn; hydrogen bonds between main chain components
Tertiary structure: see SG4
Quaternary structure: see SG4
 

When you’re done studying for this unit, you should be able to:
 

Infer details about a biomolecule based on its chemical structure.
Evaluate chemical structures that contain C, N, O, and P for proper bonding rules (e.g., 4 bonds for C, 3 bonds for N, etc.).
On a chemical structure of a biomolecule, identify atoms that could participate in hydrogen bonds.
Recall that in this class, we consider atoms in N-H, C-O, and O-H to have partial charges, but we do not consider atoms in C-H bonds to have partial charges.
Identify the functional groups listed in the vocab. above within a chemical structure or describe that structure using the classes of organic compounds listed above.
Rank chemical structures in terms of hydrophobicity.
Compare the strength of covalent and various non-covalent bonds.
Predict the product of a hydrolysis or condensation reaction based on reactant molecules’ structures (e.g., predict the product of a condensation reaction between two amino acids).
List the four major classes of biological macromolecules. For polymers (proteins, nucleic acids, and carbohydrates), match them to their appropriate monomers.
 

Describe the structure and function of proteins in living cells.
Draw the structure of the simplest amino acid, glycine (where the R-group is H) with accurate charges at physiological pH.
Categorize an R-group as nonpolar (hydrophobic), polar, positively charged (basic), or negatively charged (acidic), or a “special case” when given its structure.
In a chemical structure of a short peptide, be able to identify the peptide bonds, alpha-carbons, R-groups, hydrogen bond donors/acceptors, and N- and C- termini.
Predict whether a peptide would be stable in the nonpolar environment of a lipid bilayer based on the polarity of its amino acid R-groups and/or the existence of secondary and tertiary structures.
Draw a short peptide at physiological pH, labeling the termini and alpha-carbons.
 

Contrast the types of interactions that stabilize each of the four levels of protein structure. Also include the groups (e.g., amino, carboxy, carbonyl, R-groups, etc.) which participate in those interactions.
Describe how alpha-helix and beta-sheet secondary structures stabilize partial charges in the peptide backbone.
When given a chemical structure of a beta-sheet, classify it as parallel, antiparallel, or mixed.
Contrast the hydrogen bonding patterns in an alpha-helix, a parallel beta-sheet, and an antiparallel beta-sheet.
Calculate the length (in angstroms) of an alpha-helix when given the number of amino acids participating in helix or the number of turns in the helix.
 

For practice applying this material, complete the Practice Quiz 3 and Graded Quiz 3.