Study Guide 6
Signaling II & Carbohydrates (Lectures 12-14)
At the end of this unit, you should be able to define and/or use the following vocabulary:
Signaling II (Lectures 12-13):

(See SG5 for other terms related to signaling.)

Signals: cortisol, epinephrine, growth factor
Receptors: transmembrane receptors, G-protein coupled receptor (GPCR)*; protein kinase receptor; dimerization
Transducers: heterotrimeric G-proteins, monomeric G-proteins, Protein Kinase A (PKA)
Other Signaling components: transcription factors 
Turning signals off: intrinsic GTPase activity, ligand dissociation, receptor inactivation, breakdown of second messengers (phosphodiesterase), balancing kinase and phosphatase activity
Leptin, Leptin receptor, satiety, obesity; wild-type, mutant
Carbohydrates (Lectures 14):

(CH2O)n, sugars, mono-, di-, poly-saccharides, hydroxyl and aldehyde**
linear vs. ring forms, alpha (
) (down) vs. beta (
) (up) hydroxyl orientation at C1
glycosidic bond, hydrolysis and condensation reactions, alpha and beta linkages
glycogen, starch, cellulose
phototroph, chemotroph
*Sometimes GPCR's are referred to by their structure, 7TM (7-pass transmembrane receptor).

**These are functional groups that you were asked to memorize in SG3.

When you’re done studying for this unit, you should be able to:
Diagram a generalized network of reactions by which cells can respond to signals released by other cells (a.k.a. signal transduction pathway) using the following terms: signal, receptor, transducers, cellular response.
Recall the steps of the pathway by which glucose is released during the fight or flight response (e.g., the epinephrine pathway). Note structure/function relationships for molecules in this pathway.
Predict how disruption of certain parts of the G-protein regulation cycle would affect G-protein activity.
Identify the role of second messengers in signal transduction pathways.
Recall the name and recognize the structure of cAMP the example of a secondary messenger that we described in class.
Explain how cAMP acts to amplify signaling in the cell.
Compare and contrast the ways that different signaling pathways can be turned off.
Decide whether changing the levels/activities of components of a signaling pathway would result in the upregulation or downregulation of that pathway.
When given a figure or description of a novel signaling pathway, be able to: (1) identify the signal, receptor, second messenger, and cell response; (2) categorize it as one of the three types of pathways that we talked about (those that have intracellular receptors, protein receptor kinase, or 7TM/GPCRs); and (3) predict how disrupting one part of the novel pathway would affect the levels of downstream molecules in the pathway.
Based on your understanding of the function of signaling components discussed in class, assemble a hypothetical signaling pathway using an appropriate combination of these components.
 

Apply reasoning skills modeled in the Leptin/Obesity activity (Lecture 13). Make predictions and inferences about how wild-type and mutant mice respond to treatment with Leptin.
 

Identify the role(s) of carbohydrates in living cells.
Decide whether a molecule is a sugar based on its structure.
Draw the structure (with carbon numbering) of glucose in its linear and ring forms (alpha and beta configurations).
Deduce the type of linkage in a polysaccharide based on its chemical structure. (This should include both the carbon numbers and alpha or beta.)
Predict the result of condensation reaction involving two given carbon atoms in monosaccharides or the result of a hydrolysis reaction involving a disaccharide.
Contrast the following glucose polymers in terms of their function and linkages between glucose monomers: starch, glycogen, and cellulose.
 

For practice applying this material, complete the Practice Quiz 6 and Graded Quiz 6.