Study Guide 4
Protein Structure & Enzymes (Lectures 6-8)
At the end of this unit, you should be able to define and/or use the following vocabulary:
Protein Structure & Techniques to Study Proteins:

Levels of protein structure: primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary
Primary structure: see SG3
Secondary structure: see SG3
Tertiary structure: various types of interactions between R-groups; disulfide bridge; salt bridge
denaturation, renaturation, chaperonins, “Levinthal paradox”, “cumulative selection”
Quaternary structure: various types of interactions between two separate polypeptide chains
SDS-PAGE
reducing agents: beta-mercaptoethanol; urea
protein purification; types of chromatography: size-exclusion, ion exchange, affinity
Enzymes

Substrate; product; enzyme
Enzyme mechanisms: change in free energy (ΔG); thermodynamics vs. kinetics; activation energy (Ea); transition state; active site; induced fit model, lock and key model
Enzyme kinetics: initial velocity (Vo); KM; Vmax; Michaelis-Menten plot; Lineweaver-Burk plot
Enzyme regulation: competitive inhibition; noncompetitive inhibition; allosteric regulation, non-protein co-enzymes
 

When you’re done studying for this unit, you should be able to:
Deduce which amino acids are likely to be found at a certain location on a diagram depicting a protein structure containing disulfide bridges, ionic bonds, a beta-turn, and/or an alpha-helix.
Recall that only cysteine is able to form a covalent, disulfide bridge.
Recall that oppositely charged groups are attracted to each other through ionic bonds.
Recall that proline is not typically found in alpha-helices, due to its rigid R-group. Also recall other amino acids that can modify alpha-helix.
If a particular protein is denatured, predict whether refolding (i.e., renaturation) would likely occur: (1) in a test tube, (2) in a cell containing chaperone proteins. Explain your reasoning.
Based on a description or diagram of a protein, decide whether it has a quaternary structure.
Predict which amino acids are likely to be on the exterior of a protein embedded in the nonpolar environment (such as the interior of a lipid bilayer) or on the interior of a protein surrounded by an aqueous solution (such as the cytoplasm).
Appreciate the role of prions in protein folding and human disease.
 

Explain how enzymes enable biochemical reactions to proceed more quickly.
Compare (e.g., increase, decrease, stay the same) the rate and direction of a biological reaction in the presence and absence of an enzyme.
Predict the direction that a chemical reaction will proceed when given the change in free energy (+, -, or 0).
Compare the kinetics (e.g., Km and Vmax) for two enzymes based on data from a Michaelis-Menton or Lineweaver-Burk plot.
Define Km and Vmax in your own words.
Sketch a Michaelis-Menten curve when given a Lineweaver-Burk plot, or vice-versa.
Predict the curve on a Michaelis-Menten or Lineweaver-Burk plot if an inhibitor was added.
Categorize the type of an enzymatic inhibitor from a Michaelis-Menten or Lineweaver-Burk plot and/or that inhibitor’s structure.
 

For practice applying this material, complete the Practice Quiz 4 and Graded Quiz 4.