Study Guide 2
Cell Structure (Lectures 1 and 2)
At the end of this unit, you should be able to define and/or use the following vocabulary:
Biology: the study of life

Prokaryotes, eukaryotes, archaea
Conservation of basic cellular functions
Cell Biology:

Plasma membrane
Nucleoid
Ribosomes
Nucleus: Nucleolus, Nuclear Pore Complex, Nuclear lamina, Euchromatin, Heterochromatin, NLS sequence, Nucleoplasm
Endomembrane system: smooth ER, rough ER, cis and trans Golgi, vesicles
Mitochondria: matrix, inner membrane, intermembrane space
Chloroplasts: thylakoid lumen, stroma, grana
Endosymbiont theory
Lysosomes & vacuoles
Endocytosis & exocytosis
Cytoskeleton: actin microfilament and microtubule (may not be covered until lecture 3)
Motor proteins & vesicle transport (may not be covered until lecture 3)
 

When you’re done studying for this unit, you should be able to:
Appreciate the scale of life, either by ordering the size of known structures or by comparing scale bars on images.
Decide whether a cell is from a eukaryotic plant, a eukaryotic animal, or a prokaryotic bacterium based on its structure.
Draw a bacterial, a plant, and an animal cell. In all three drawings, label the location(s) of ribosomes and DNA. When appropriate, your drawing should also include the following: cell wall, nucleoid, nucleus (include structures in bullet above), mitochondria, chloroplast, vacuole, and the components of the endomembrane system.
In all three of your diagrams, label where the following biological processes could occur: (1) energy production, (2) storage of genetic information and DNA synthesis, (3) transcription (i.e., RNA production from a DNA template), (4) protein synthesis. Recall the function of each eukaryotic organelle and the structures within them (e.g., nucleolus, nuclear pore complex, etc.).
In your eukaryotic cell drawings, note the path that a trans-membrane or secreted protein would take from the original point of synthesis to its final location (i.e., exocytosis).
In your eukaryotic cell drawings, note the path of that matter  internalized by endocytosis then degraded would follow.
Recognize the structure of organelles in a diagram or images from a microscope.
Predict what would happen to the cell if each organelle was disrupted.
Visualize how the orientation of the two membrane “faces” would change through the steps of endocytosis or exocytosis.
Provide evidence that mitochondria and chloroplasts arose through endocytosis of a bacterial cells.
Contrast the components of the cytoskeleton by (1) name of monomer, (2) the location within the cell, and (3) roles within the cell. (may not be covered until lecture 3)
 

For practice applying this material, complete the Practice Quiz 2 and Graded Quiz 2.